---
title: About Me
---

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/css/about_me.css" />

I am Braden Walters, professionally a computer scientist. I also have an
interest for language, culture, and much more. Here you can read about both my
professional skills (probably the reason you're here), and a little bit about me
in general.

## A Picture of Me
<div style="text-align: center;"><img alt="Picture of Braden Walters" src="/images/DSCN1157.jpg" width="300px" /></div>

## CV
 * [Cirriculum Vitae in English](../docs/cv-en.pdf)
 * [Lebenslauf auf Deutsch](../docs/cv-de.pdf)

## Software Development

Check me out at [<img alt="GitHub" src="http://monitorama.com/2013/images/github_logo.png" height="30px" />](https://github.com/meoblast001),
where I upload all of my free and open source personal projects.

### Web Development

At the time of writing this page, all of my professional experience has been in
web development. Therefore I decided to include an entire section for web
development, including sub-sections.

#### Back-End

**Yesod / Snap / Haskell:** I have experience with two different Haskell web
frameworks through personal projects. I have used the macro-framework Yesod to
write an example application for my Haskell PayPal REST client library. I
experimented with the Snap micro-framework while writing a toy project serving
as a quotation database.

**Ruby on Rails:** I have hobby and professional experience with Ruby on Rails.
I used it professionally from Summer of 2013 until Autumn of 2015 while working
with [The Learning Egg](https://www.lightninggrader.com/). I've also used it in
my personal project [KKSystem](https://kksystem.org/) since Spring of 2014. I
have experience with quite a few Gems (libraries) including Devise, Squeel,
CarrierWave, and Capybara. I also have experience with internationalisation in
Rails.

**Django / Python:** I used the Django web framework from Summer of 2011 until
Spring of 2014 in my personal project [KKSystem](https://kksystem.org/) before
it was migrated to Ruby on Rails. I have experience with core elements of the
framework, as well as form models, internationalisation, and migrations through
South.

**PHP:** Most of my PHP experience is through professional work. While working
with [The Learning Egg](https://www.lightninggrader.com/) I used the Yii
Framework from Autumn of 2011 until Summer of 2013. Since Summer of 2015 I have
used the Zend Framework 1 and 2 while working with
[Unister](https://unister.de).

**Microsoft MVC:** During some independent professional work I used Microsoft
MVC with Mono. In addition I have experience with Entity Framework and
NHibernate for database connectivity, although I am interested in other types
of database connectivity libraries for C#.

#### Front-End

**JavaScript:** In essentially every project where I've worked on back-end code,
I've also written front-end code where necessary. Naturally this includes HTML
and CSS, but also includes JavaScript client code. Although I have a preference
for back-end code, I have no problem moving code to the front-end when it is
more practical to do so.

**CoffeeScript:** When writing JavaScript, I tend to accomplish this indirectly
by writing CoffeeScript, a language which is semantically the same as
JavaScript but offers syntactical qualities which, in my opinion, make the code
easier to write and more readable.

**jQuery:** jQuery belongs to my personal JavaScript "Prelude", or standard
library. By this I mean I use jQuery in essentially every project I use which
has JavaScript or CoffeeScript. I prefer to use jQuery where possible for easier
access to many of the browser's features, such as DOM selection and AJAX.

**Underscore.js:** Another library belonging to my JavaScript "Prelude" is
Underscore. Underscore provides many abstract higher order functions to
JavaScriptwhich are very useful and reduce code duplication. In addition,
Underscore offers a powerful templating system which I frequently use.

### Game Development

**OpenGL:** Although my OpenGL experience is not extremely advanced, I have
experience with many of the core features, such as geometry rendering,
materials, lighting, and vertex buffer objects. I have some experience with GLSL
vertex shaders as well. I generally use OpenGL 2.1, but the majority of the
features I use were already available at OpenGL 1.0. All of my OpenGL work has
been in hobby projects.

**Artificial Intelligence:**

**OpenAL:** I have used OpenAL in personal projects to provide cross-platform
audio in 3D applications. I have not used the 3D audio features that the API
offers, but I have used it to play background music, specifically from OGG
Vorbis files. Like with OpenGL, my OpenAL experience is only in hobby projects.

**Bullet Physics:**

### Mobile Development

**Android:** Through my personal project Thugaim, I've developed experience with
the Android API. Because this project is a game, much of my Android experience
is with the canvas API. In addition, I use multiple activities and intents to
traverse between them. I have also accessed the devices hardware (primarily to
determine device rotation), the media API to play background music, and bundles
to fetch resources used at runtime. Although I have much more of the API to
explore, this one project has introduced me to quite a lot of it.

## Language

I have an interest in foreign languages. In my free-time I learned several
European languages and have reached different skill levels with each.

**English:** English is my native language. There's not much to say here. I can
use it fairly well, although I'm sometimes surprised at the difficulty I have
recalling words which I remember in foreign languages.

**German:** I began learning German in December of 2010. Through studying and
both written and spoken use of the language, I have achieved approximately a C1
proficiency.

**Swedish:** I began learning Swedish around Autumn of 2011 and have studied it
intermittently since. My knowledge of Swedish can be useful at times, but it
is very limited due to difficulty finding opportunities to use the language.
My proficiency is approximately A1.
